---
layout: post
title: h-index 101
date: 2021-04-16
description: A simple way to think of how h-index is computed
---

## `h-index` as a metric
`h-index` is a metric that is used to measure the research impact of researchers all over the world. I have once read a quote that thinks of metrics as if they are proxies to unmeasurable quantities. In other words, one can't easily say that the research impact/contribution of someone is higher than another one. Thus, these metrics can't be used on their own to compare and evaluate the previous publications of a researcher.<br>
As for any **index** metric, the higher the value the better. Consequently, having an h-index of 2 is better than having an h-index of 1.

## Definition
According to Google Scholar metrics<sup>[1](#google-scholar-metrics)</sup>:
> The `h-index` of a publication is the largest number h such that at least h articles in that publication were cited at least h times each. For example, a publication with five articles cited by, respectively, 17, 9, 6, 3, and 2, has the h-index of 3.

Reading this for the first time daunted me somehow.

## A simple method to compute the `h-index`
For the example given in the Google scholar description of `h-index`, How can one easily compute the `h-index` for "a publication with five articles cited by, respectively, 17, 9, 6, 3, and 2"?

For this publication to have an `h-index` of 1, they must have at least one article that has at least one citation. Since this criteria is satisified then the publication can have an h-index of 1.<br>
But, can they have an `h-index` of 2? The answer is yes since they have at least TWO articles (actually they have 5 publications) each with at least 2 citations.<br>
What about having an `h-index` of 3? The publication has at least THREE articles (actually they had four) with at least three citations.<br>
Finally, you can easily notice that the publication has only three articles with four or more citations thus they don't qualify to have an `h-index` of 4.<br>
Therefore, the publication's `h-index` will be just 3.


<a name="google-scholar-metrics" href="https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/metrics.html#metrics" target="_blank">[1] https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/metrics.html#metrics</a>
